Good day , I'm Norman Wildberger, and today
we're going to introduce the rational numbers,
the first and most important example of
what in mathematics is called a field,
which is roughly a domain in which
we can do addition, multiplication,
subtraction, and division in
a complete and consistent way.
So the story up till now is that we've
started with the natural numbers and then
we introduced the fractions by dividing, and we
introduced the integers by subtracting. We want
to now go from the integers to the rational
numbers in just the same way as we went from
the natural numbers to the fractions. That is, we
want to augment the integers by allowing division.
So let's just make sure we understand what these
various terms mean. By "number," I mean natural
numbers in Hindu-Arabic notation, things like
1, 2, 3, and so on. By "fraction," I mean an
expression of the form 2 over 3 or 3 over 1,
where the constituents are natural numbers. By
"integer," I mean an expression of the form
1 less 2 or 3 less 1, where again, 1 and 2,
3 and 1 are natural numbers. What we're going to
do is use these integers to form rational numbers,
and a rational number is going to be just
like this: an integer over another integer.
Here's the official definition: A
rational number is an ordered pair (a,
b), where a and b are integers and b is not equal
to zero. And I'll explain that in a second. We
write this ordered pair (a, b) as a/b, just the
same way as we write a fraction. What is zero?
Zero is a special integer; it's the integer
1 less 1, which is also equal to 2 less 2 or
3 less 3. So we require that the second integer
is not equal to zero when we form this quotient.
There's an important notion of equality that
you'll not be surprised by now: that a/b is equal
to c/d precisely when ad equals bc, when this
times this equals this times this. So that's what
a rational number is, and we denote that type by
the symbol ℚ, which stands for a rational number.
Now let's introduce some notation that makes
rational numbers look more familiar. Let's start
with the integer 1 less 2. We will write that in
the more familiar way as -1, and we'll agree that
3 less 1 is written in the more familiar way
as 2, even though there remains a possibility
of confusing integers with natural numbers.
Officially, we want to keep them straight.
More generally, if we have m less n, then there
are three possibilities: if m is bigger than n,
then this is equal to m minus n, and we will
write it as m minus n. If n is bigger than m,
then we'll get what we usually call a
negative number, and we will write it
as minus (n minus m). That's if n is
bigger than m. If m and n are equal,
then we'll just use the symbol
zero, as we've already introduced.
Now a little bit of notation for rational numbers:
1 less 2 over 3 less 1. Now that we've
got a name for 1 less 2, we call it -1,
and 3 less 1, we call that 2. So this rational
number can be expressed as -1/2. We will also
introduce the other standard notation that when
we have 1 in the denominator, such as 3/1, then
we'll abbreviate that to be 3. We'll abbreviate
0/1 to be 0, 1/1 to be 1, and so on. That way,
the natural numbers fit inside the rational
numbers, but it's a little bit of a deception
because officially rational numbers, natural
numbers, and integers are all separate types.
Now we can define the main operations for
rational numbers. First of all, addition:
if we have a/b + c/d, then we use exactly
the familiar form for fractions. The sum
is defined to be (ad + bc) / bd. Here, a,
b, c, and d are integers. The product a/b
times c/d is by definition (a * c) /
(b * d). Then the inverse operations,
subtraction and division, are easily
obtained: a/b minus c/d is (ad - bc) / bd,
and a/b divided by c/d, which we also write
a/b ÷ c/d, is equal to (a * d) / (b * c).
So those are the four main operations,
and there's just a bit of qualification in
all of these. The denominators cannot be 0,
and when we divide, we have to make sure
that c is not equal to 0, because otherwise
we would be dividing by 0. So division by
0 is not allowed; otherwise, we're fine.
The rational numbers are now what is
called a field. This is a technical term in
mathematics, and we want to be precise about what
it means. So we'll say that the rational numbers,
which is a type of object together with the
operations of addition and multiplication,
form a field. What does that mean? Well,
it means that various laws are satisfied:
The associative laws: P + (Q + R) = (P
+ Q) + R and P * (Q * R) = (P * Q) * R.
The commutative laws: P + Q
= Q + P and P * Q = Q * P.
Then we have some special elements, three special
elements in fact: ones that we call zero, one, and
minus one, and they have the following properties:
0 + P = P (so we say that zero is
an additive identity),
1 * P = P (that means for
any P, one is a multiplicative identity),
and that 1 + (-1) together add up to zero.
There's another property called the
inverse property: if you have any
element P which is not zero, then there should
be another element Q, sometimes denoted P⁻¹,
which has the property that P * Q = 1. So
every element P has an inverse one so that
when you multiply the two of them, you get one.
Finally, the distributive law that connects
multiplication and addition: P
* (Q + R) = (P * Q) + (P * R).
Now it's an important exercise to verify that the
rational numbers, together with the operations
that we've defined, satisfy all of these laws.
There's nothing really new in doing this, and I'm
not going to do it because it would take me a few
videos to do, but it's an excellent exercise for
a graduate student or an undergraduate who's
interested in understanding how mathematics
really works. It's something that's often not
done properly, but it's an important exercise.
The rational numbers are the first
example of a field, and later on,
we'll introduce other examples of fields.
It's very important to recognize, though,
that the rational numbers are the most
important field. They always work;
they always will be. People might try to convince
you that the real numbers or the complex numbers
or something else are more important. It's
not the case. The rational numbers, which
we've spent a fair amount of time developing, are
always the most important field in mathematics.
Next time, we're going to have a look
at how to visualize rational numbers,
and we're going to connect rational numbers
to a remarkable set of objects called Ford
circles. It's going to give us some really
beautiful geometrical insight into the nature
of rational numbers. I hope you're going
to join me for that. I'm Norman Wildberger.